While quantitatively India is inching closer to universal education, the
quality of its education has been questioned particularly in its government
run school system.

**Course**: [Language Laboratory], Spring 2012<br>
**Taught by**: Prof. Nihar Ranjan Mishra

[Language Laboratory]: https://github.com/nitrece/language-laboratory

<br>
<br>

### Slide 2
What is the importance of Education:
Wducation plays a vital role in our personal growth and social development
for all of us. Our behaviour, our daily habits, our dreams are all a
reflection of our education. They way we interact and socialize with others
also depends upon eduction. If one has knowledge of computers, then he/she
will be interested in talking to other people about computers. If someone
is good at studies, then he/she would be interested in talking about studies.
Education makes us capable of serving the people for common good.


### Slide 3
In the **Sravana** stage of education, students received **shrutis** knowledge,
which was passed orally from one generation to another. The second stage was
**Manana** which means that pupils had to think themselves about what they
have heard.  They have to make their own inferences and assimilate the lesson
taught by their teacher into the life. The third stage **Nidhyasana** means
complete comprehension of truth and its use in the life. 

Few of the most important universities of India in the ancient times were
*Taxila*, *Vikramshila* and *Nalanda*. **Nalanda** was the highest learning
center not just of India but also of the entire South Asia. Students from
foreign countries like China, Japan, Korea used to come here for higher
studies. It had around 10,000 students and teachers on its roll cards. The
University had eight colleges. And one of the colleges had four-storied
building. It was one of the earliest examples of residential cum learning
complex. 

India had several great minds at work, which contributed in every aspect of
life. The *Concept of zero*, *Decimal number system*, *Pythagoras Theorem*
were all developed here. As India progressed from ancient to medieval its
education system deteriorated. Various factors were responsible for the
degradation of this most efficient and most ancient education system of the
world.


### Slide 4-7

The **UNESCO's International Institute of Educational Planning** study on
corruption in education released recently says that 25% **teacher absenteeism**
in India is among the highest in the world, second only after Uganda that
has a higher rate. The global average of teacher absenteeism is about 20%.

Teacher absenteeism does not just affect quality of education; it is also a
huge drain on resources resulting in the wastage of 22.5% of education funds
in India the study said. Politics in teacher appointments and transfers is a
major reason for teacher absenteeism according to a professor at National
University for Education Planning and Administration.

In Bihar two of every five teachers were reported absent. Teachers also
believe highly in private tutoring a practice identified by UNESCO as
unethical. It does not complement learning at school and leads to corruption
the report said. The practice of ghost teachers and involvement of teachers
in mismanagement of schools were other gray areas identified in the Indian
education system.

Another indictment of the sorry state of Indian education was the view held
by students that **cheating in examinations** is their traditional right. In
India universities cheating is now well-established. The fees for manipulating
entrance tests ranges between $80 to $20,000 for popular programmes such as
computer science, medicine and engineering the report said. 


### Slide 9

The Act makes it mandatory for every child between the ages of 6-14 to be
**provided for education** by the State. This means that such child does not
have to pay a single penny as regards books, uniforms, etc. Any time of the
academic year, a child can go to a school and demand that this right be
respected. Private education institutions have to reserve 25% of their seats
starting from class I in 2011 to disadvantaged students. Strict criteria for
the qualification of teachers. There is a requirement of a teacher student
ratio of 1:30 at each of these schools that ought to be met within a given
time frame. The schools need to have certain minimum facilities like adequate
teachers, playground and infrastructure. The government will evolve some
mechanism to help marginalised schools comply with the provisions of the Act.

There is a new concept of **neighbourhood schools** that has been devised.
This is similar to the model in the United States. This would imply that the
state government and local authorities will establish primary schools within
walking distance of 1km of the neighbourhood. In case of children for Class
VI to VIII, the school should be within a walking distance of 3km of the
neighbourhood. Unaided and private schools shall ensure that children from
weaker sections and disadvantaged groups shall not be segregated from the
other children in the classrooms nor shall their classes be held at places
and timings different from the classes held for the other children.
